---
title: "Adaptive uniform grayscale coded aperture design for high dynamic range compressive spectral imaging"
collection: talks
type: "Conference"
permalink: /talks/2016-05-10-conference-04
venue: "Baltimore Convention Center"
date: 2016-05-10
location: "Baltimore, Maryland United States"
---

Imaging spectroscopy is an important area with many applications in surveillance, agriculture and medicine. The disadvantage of conventional spectroscopy techniques is that they collect the whole datacube. In con- trast, compressive spectral imaging systems capture snapshot compressive projections, which are the input of reconstruction algorithms to yield the underlying datacube. Common compressive spectral imagers use coded apertures to perform the coded projections. The coded apertures are the key elements in these imagers since they define the sensing matrix of the system. The proper design of the coded aperture entries leads to a good quality in the reconstruction. In addition, the compressive measurements are prone to saturation due to the limited dynamic range of the sensor, hence the design of coded apertures must consider saturation. The saturation errors in compressive measurements are unbounded and compressive sensing recovery algorithms only provide solutions for bounded noise or bounded with high probability. In this paper it is proposed the design of uniform adaptive grayscale coded apertures (UAGCA) to improve the dynamic range of the estimated spectral images by reducing the saturation levels. The saturation is attenuated between snapshots using an adaptive filter which updates the entries of the grayscale coded aperture based on the previous snapshots. The coded apertures are optimized in terms of transmittance and number of grayscale levels. The advantage of the proposed method is the efficient use of the dynamic range of the image sensor. Extensive simulations show improvements in the image reconstruction of the proposed method compared with grayscale coded apertures (UGCA) and adaptive block-unblock coded apertures (ABCA) in up to 10 dB.

[Download conference here](https://nelson10.github.io/NelsonDiaz.github.io/files/Conference04.pdf)

[More information here](https://www.spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie/9860/98600A/Adaptive-uniform-grayscale-coded-aperture-design-for-high-dynamic-range/10.1117/12.2224378.short?SSO=1&tab=ArticleLinkCited)

Recommended citation: N. Diaz, H. Rueda, and H. Arguello. "Adaptive uniform grayscale coded aperture design for high dynamic range compressive spectral imaging," <i>Hyperspectral Imaging Sensors: Innovative Applications and Sensor Standards 2016</i>. 2016.

```
@inproceedings{10.1117/12.2224378,
author = {Nelson Diaz and Hoover Rueda and Henry Arguello},
title = {{Adaptive uniform grayscale coded aperture design for high dynamic range compressive spectral imaging}},
volume = {9860},
booktitle = {Hyperspectral Imaging Sensors: Innovative Applications and Sensor Standards 2016},
editor = {David P. Bannon},
organization = {International Society for Optics and Photonics},
publisher = {SPIE},
pages = {13 -- 21},
keywords = {Imaging systems, Adaptive imaging, Coded aperture imaging, Computational imaging, Multispectral and hyperspectral imaging},
year = {2016},
doi = {10.1117/12.2224378},
URL = {https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2224378}
}
```
